# fish_daphnia_neurotox_public
Code related to the publication "Daphnids Can Safeguard the Use of Alternative Bioassays to the Acute Fish Toxicity Test: A Focus on Neurotoxicity" by Schür et al. (2024) in Environmental Toxicology &amp; Chemistry.

Abstract
Assessment of potential impacts of chemicals on the environment traditionally involves regulatory standard data requirements for acute aquatic toxicity testing using algae, daphnids and fish (e.g., OECD test guidelines (TG) 201, 202, and 203, respectively), representing different trophic levels. In line with the societal goal to replace or reduce vertebrate animal testing, alternative bioassays were developed to replace testing with fish: the fish cell line RTgill-W1 acute toxicity assay (OECD TG249) and the zebrafish embryo acute toxicity test (zFET, OECD TG236). However, previous studies revealed the lower sensitivity of the RTgill-W1 cell line assay and zFET for some neurotoxic chemicals and allyl alcohol, which is presumably biotransformed in fish to the more toxic acrolein (which is predicted well through the cell line assay). To provide an additional alternative to acute fish toxicity, in this study, we analyzed historic ecotoxicity data for fish and daphnids from the EnviroTox Database. We found a considerable variability in acute fish LC50 and acute daphnids EC50 values, particularly for neurotoxic chemicals. Comparing sensitivity of these taxonomic groups according to different neurotoxicity classification schemes indicates that fish rarely represent the most sensitive trophic level of the two. Exceptions here most prominently include a few cyclodiene compounds, which are no longer marketed, and a chemical group that could be identified through structural alerts. Moreover, daphnids are more sensitive than fish to acrolein. This analysis highlights the potential of the Daphnia acute toxicity test, which is usually a standard regulatory data requirement, in safeguarding the environmental protection level provided by the RTgill-W1 cell line assay and the zFET. This research, rooted in decades of efforts to replace the fish acute toxicity test, shifts the focus from predicting fish toxicity 1-to-1 to emphasizing the protectiveness of alternative methods, paving the way for further eliminating vertebrate tests in environmental toxicology.
